---
title: Geologic Layer Development
description: Description of how geologic layers are developed
author: Oak Ridges Moraine Groundwater Program
date: 2022-11-22
output: html_document
---

# Introduction
Construction of aquifer and aquitard layers geometry was one of the most challenging aspects of this study. Simple interpolation of sparse point data (well picks) rarely produces layer surfaces that realistically represent the structure and continuity of complex hydrogeologic features such as channel and valley systems. To fully represent the complexity of the aquifers and aquitards in the Oak Ridges Moraine area, borehole lithology picks were supplemented with information obtained from, subtle hydrogeologic indicators (such as well screen placement and well depth) as well as from expert intuition and geologic conceptual understanding of the sedimentological processes. This information was integrated into the model construction process using 3-D polylines to constrain the interpolation processes.

Database integration, data flexible visualization, efficient layer picking tools, and geostatistical analysis functions provided by the VIEWLOG software made it possible to review and synthesize the large amounts of borehole data (discussed further below). The resulting hydrostratigraphic model not only honoured the borehole and well data, but also encapsulated the conceptual understanding of the processes that formed the Oak Ridges Moraine.

# Data Correction and Data Biases
Ontario Ministry of Environment driller’s logs form the majority of the borehole information in the database. The accuracy and reliability of individual wells in this data set is sometimes questionable, however, the logs provide a significant amount of useful subsurface information. Care was taken to screen the data visually and correct for obvious or known errors, thereby minimizing the intrinsic biases in the driller’s logs.

ome of the location and elevation errors in the MOE’s database were addressed through field validation (using GPS) of over 5,000 of the wells which had not previously been located (Beatty and Associates 2003). Borehole elevations were compared against, and adjusted to the high resolution DEM (10 m cell size) to minimize elevation errors. Highly erroneous or unreliable wells (MOE quality code greater than 6) were excluded from the analysis.

Water well records in the western Oak Ridges Moraine were compared against detailed core logging from geotechnical, hydrogeological and sedimentologically-logged boreholes (Sharpe et al., 2002). Logan et al. (2001) showed the value of using these high-quality records to “train’ the well records (e.g. Logan et al., 2001). Thus, higher quality “golden spike” wells and seismic picks were used extensively during layer refinement. The high quality “golden spike” wells, seismic picks, and outcrop data (as well as any other higher quality data) were identified (and given greater weight) using a variety of qualitative measures. Well ownership was also examined and any wells drilled by a consultant or for a municipality were assumed to be of higher quality and were given more weight in the interpretation. Frequently, wells with poorer or better quality information could be readily identified by visually comparing clusters of wells on cross section (e.g. poorer wells would have a single geological description through the entire depth of the well).

A standardized scheme to re-code driller’s log descriptions was developed by three GSC geologists for the Oak Ridges Moraine area (Russell et al., 1998). Re-coded lithologic information helped identify drillers’ tendencies in reporting data but could not be relied upon without referring to the high-quality data. A significant bias was the use of the term “clay” by the water well drillers. In reality, analysis suggested that reported “clay“ material was more likely to be silt or fine sand. Similarly, drillers rarely use the term till but use terms such as “hardpan” or “hard” or report occurrences of “clay gravel”. Re-coded lithologic log information was displayed on cross section during interpretation and picking, however, presentation of the original (un-coded) raw MOE lithologic descriptions was still considered essential to the identification of unit boundaries and key indicator patterns.

Other percieved biases and patterns were identified during the geological surface refinement process. As most drillers are hired simply to “find water”, they frequently stop drilling as soon as they encounter a significant aquifer zone. Since tapping into the top few metres of a significant aquifer is all that is necessary to meet the needs of most domestic well owners, very little of the permeable aquifer material is sampled and documented within the driller’s logs. As a result, the majority of driller’s logs are typically a record of aquitard materials, with only the bottom-most screened sand or gravel unit representative of aquifer material. Despite these biases, highly significant patterns were identified within the logs, as discussed in the following sections.

# Data Visualization and Analysis Softwware Tools 

VIEWLOG was the borehole analysis/GIS software used for all data visualization, synthesis and interpretation tasks in this study. The software provides an integrated set of GIS mapping functions (including 3-D gridding and contouring), dynamic cross section generationing, real-time 3-D fly-throughs, and borehole data display, editing and picking functions, as shown in Figure D131. The software directly connects directly to the relational database containing the borehole logs, well construction, and water level data. This allows the user to dynamically query and filter the visual presentation based on database criteria.

Despite the fact that the data is highly three-dimensional in nature, most interpretation was performed on cross sections. Real-time 3-D viewing provides a more qualitative view of the data, however, for detailed and accurate layer picking, cross sections provide a more suitable framework. The use of the software’s dynamic cross sections, which can be easily shifted back and forth through the dataset, was another important feature of the layer refinement process. At any point during the interpretation, the vertical exaggeration could be adjusted and the borehole offset changed to add or remove boreholes from the section. The cross sections could also be dynamically sliced through one or more geologic models, allowing units from the stratigraphic and hydrostratigraphic models to be easily compared. Finally, to further assist in the layer refinement, the surficial geology was also included on all sections as a color-coded band (using standard lithology colors) immediately below the ground surface. 

Considerable effort was spent optimizing the presentation of the borehole data on cross section. The software permits the display of any number of columns of lithology (raw codes, GSC recoding, etc.) and hydraulic information (well screen, static water level, etc.) at each well location. Lithology symbol patterns and colors were chosen to fully represent the range of material codes and allow for the identification of subtle patterns and correlations (Figure D132). A pop-up window containing the well details, in tabular or graphical form, was also available during the interpretation process. It was determined that the most effective display on cross section was to use all three columns of MOE geological descriptions (Mat 1, Mat 2, Mat 3), hydrogeologic indicators such as well screen interval in a fourth column, and the GSC recoded lithology in a fifth column. 

The software’s 3--D polyline drawing functions were used to capture the expert’s intuition during the interpretation process. Polylines are simply lines of contact separating different hydrostratigraphic or geologic units. Ensuring the continuity of channel and valley systems was necessary to correctly simulate the flow of water through these features. While well picking formed the majority of the interpretation task, 3--D polylines were used to constrain and control the surface generation process (Figure D133). Polylines were added either perpendicular or parallel to the axis of a channel or valley feature. Each polyline was assigned to a hydrostratigraphic unit, and the individual vertex points in that polyline were then included (along with the well picks) in the gridding process for that particular unit. For example, the drainage pattern in bedrock valley systems was created by adding polylines down the inferred thalweg cross section. The truncation and pinch out of layers at the edges of the tunnel channels was defined using polylines perpendicular to the axis of the channel feature. Plan view manual contouring was also integrated as necessary. 
